\section{Trajectory Sufrace Hopping}
\label{sec:TSH}

As described in the seminal works on TSH\cite{Tully98_407, Tully90_1061}, via
insertion of \cref{eq:AdiaExp} into \cref{eq:WaveEq}, one may derive an
approximate equation of motion for an electronic superposition state evolving
along a classical nuclear trajectory,
\begin{align}
  &i  \partial_t c_K(t) = H_{KJ}(t) c_J(t) \label{eq:EOMCs} \\
  &H_{KJ}(t) = \delta_{KJ}E_J(t) - i d_{KJ}^\xi (t) \partial_t R_{\xi}(t) \label{eq:HamiltonianElec} \\
  &d_{KJ}^\xi (t) = \innerop{\Phi_K(\vc{R}(t),t)}{\nabla^\xi}{\Phi_J(\vc{R}(t),t)} \label{eq:NAC}
  \quad .
\end{align}
The nuclear position time evolution is governed by Newtonian mechanics,
\begin{equation}
  -\nabla E_c(t) = \vc{m}\cdot \partial_t^2\vc{R}(t) \label{eq:Newton}
  \quad.
\end{equation}
Here, $\vc{m}$ collects the masses for each nucleus, and $d_{IJ}^\xi$ is the
rank-3 non--adiabatic coupling (NAC) tensor that provides an affine topological
connection on the electronic manifold through the nuclear momentum operator.
$\xi$ is an arbitrary nuclear coordinate.  While $E_J$ in
\cref{eq:HamiltonianElec} represents an arbitrary energy eigenvalue of adiabat
$J$, $E_c(t)$ ($c$ indicating ``current") from \cref{eq:Newton} is the
electronic eigenenergy designated by the TSH algorithm to drive the nuclear
evolution at time $t$.  

%Talk about algorithm to switch the state throughout the dynamics

The representation of the separated equations of motion for the electronic and
nuclear degrees of freedom in
\cref{eq:EOMCs,eq:HamiltonianElec,eq:NAC,eq:Newton} are completely general to
any method used to obtain the electronic adiabatic states. There have been many
extensions of this methods to a vast number of different electronic structure
methods. Recently, I have extended this method for use within the
particle--particle Tamm--Dancoff approximation for the description of the
electronic states\cite{DBWY16_Submitted1}, of which results are presented in
\cref{sec:pp-TSH}. Although TSH has been applied to study ISC using perturbative
approaches of accounting for SOC effects, I argue that this treatment is
inherently flawed as the SOC that is argued to be so negligible as to be
treated perturbatively is exactly the term that gives rise to the physical
phenomena that they observe. To properly treat SOC in TSH, one must account for
the SOC in a non--perturbative manner through an \emph{ab initio} treatment of
some relativistic Hamiltonian.

